All right in this lesson will introduce or reveal three core JavaScript functions and they are set time
out set interval and clear interval.
If you feel comfortable with these functions, you can feel free to skip this lesson.
Otherwise, stay here and join me in our Playground Digest file.
As a reminder, this is the file we created where we can play around with core JavaScript and view ideas
outside of our project.
Now, just to set the stage as to why we're learning these core functions, this is what we're going
to utilize within our view components in order to render that dynamic text that changes every 5 seconds.
So as you may recall from the Google Careers website, when the page loads, the user sees text like
code for everyone, and then within 5 seconds that primary verb changes to something like Designed for
everyone.
And then there's another 5 seconds, and then it changes to build for everyone.
And there's actually four different words that it alternates between, but it runs on this consistent
interval, this consistent cycle of every 5 seconds.
It keeps changing that word, and it doesn't stop as long as you're on the page.
And we're going to see how we can use JavaScript to emulate that behavior in this lesson.
Then we're going to take this JavaScript logic and add it to our components in the upcoming list.
So first up, the first function I'd like to introduce you to is set timeout.
So I'm going to write its name here and invoke it set timeout with a capital T.
And this actually takes two arguments.
The first is going to be a function, and the second is going to be a number which represents the number
of milliseconds to wait.
And I'll explain what this means in just a second, but let's write a core arrow function here, and
I'll provide my second argument first.
And what I'm going to do here is 2000.
So here's how set timeout works.
Set time out waits a certain amount of time, a given duration before it runs the logic of your function
that you provide as the first argument.
So the second argument represents how long to wait in milliseconds, and as a reminder, 1000 milliseconds
is equal to 1/2.
So when I put 2000 here, I put effectively 2 seconds.
So what I'm telling set timeout is wait 2 seconds and then JavaScript will automatically run whatever
I put into this function body.
So for now we can do something simple like a console.log and I will say I will print 2 seconds after
the program starts.
She can almost think of it like a pause.
Right?
So we're saying JavaScript pause for this amount of time, then run this function so I can run a program
here.
It's found within the source directory.
The file is playground dogs.
And notice here, when I run this, we have what appears to be a pause and then it finally gets to 2
seconds.
It runs that function, including the console.log, and then the program finally ends.
So this might be a good start for us because for example, we can get the page to load and we can tell
you, hey, wait 5 seconds and then change the verb that you are using in front of the text.
And if we attach that to something like a data property, well then we can get a view to automatically
re render that new word on screen.
And that's a good idea.
But the only problem is, of course, is that it's only going to run once, set time out, waits a certain
amount of time, then runs the function.
We provide it only once.
So that will change our verb exactly once.
And that's not what we want.
We want it to consistently be changing every 5 seconds.
So how can we do that while there's a complimentary built in function in JavaScript called a set interval?
So I'm going to replace set timeout here with set interval.
And both of these functions, by the way, are global functions.
And what that means is we can run them from the top level of JavaScript as we've done so already.
That means we don't need to import them from anywhere, they don't come from any NPM library or anything
like that.
They are built into JavaScript and we can use them in any JavaScript file we want, just like self.
So how to set interval work?
Well, it accepts the exact same arguments as set timeout.
It accepts a function and a duration in milliseconds.
And I'm still going to leave 2000, which represents 2 seconds.
But the way that interval works is it runs the function every time.
It doesn't stop, it runs it at a consistent interval, which is where the name comes from.
So in simpler terms, what I'm saying is every 2 seconds JavaScript will run the function that we provided
as the first argument set timeout will only run the function once, while set interval will set an interval
of time, at which point to run the function consecutively consistently.
So what we're saying here is run every 2 seconds.
So I'm going to change this to just simply saying I will print every 2 seconds.
That's the difference between set interval, which runs forever basically, and versus set timeout which
runs once.
So let's see how this works.
I'm going to start this program up and you'll notice in 2 seconds the first console.log appears and
then the next 2 seconds it continues.
And actually if you were to walk away from your computer for an hour, this would actually continue
running.
There's nothing telling JavaScript to stop, which means in JavaScript mind the program is still consistently
running and it's still printing this out every 2 seconds.
So I'm going to terminate this program.
I'm actually in a press control C just to make sure we terminate it.
And this is kind of moving us in the right direction, right?
Because every 5 seconds, let's say in the browser, we can change the view components data and we can
effectively for say re render that will get the text that we want on the screen.
Right.
This is a step in the right direction.
However, as you see here, we had to manually terminate this process.
We had to actually force know to stop running in order to get this to terminate.
And that can actually problematic, right.
Because we want a more elegant way to get our program to to stop this execution.
So imagine, for example, that we are on the main page where we have this verb changing, but then
the user navigates to another page.
At that point, we don't want to shut down our node process.
We don't want to shut down our browser or our console in the browser.
We want to just terminate this bit of logic as the user navigates to the other page.
A common problem that many developers run into when working with set interval is this logic can actually
accidentally keep running in the background even when you want it to be terminated.
Right?
So you may, for example, navigate to a new page in view, but have it consistently be trying to change
the data property every couple of seconds if we accidentally don't shut down this interval or tear it
down.
So how do we tear down this interval?
Well, there's a complimentary function called Clear Interval, and it accepts an interval object and
it knows how to shut down that interval object or in other words, make it stop running.
So where do we get that interval object from?
We actually get it as the return value of the set interval function.
So right here, I'm going to assign this to a contact called Interval.
And I'm just going to print out an email right here with a console.log.
So let's save this file and run this.
And we're going to see something interesting, which is that the interval object is going to be printed
first and then we're actually going to see that consecutive printing every 2 seconds.
So there we see our interval object print and then you can see we go back to this, I will print every
2 seconds.
That brings up an important JavaScript point, which is actually it used to be a common question in
JavaScript interviews, which is why do we see this timeout object first?
And the answer is because JavaScript does not stop the execution of the remainder of the file.
Just because there is an interval.
The interval kind of exists in its own separate world, in a sense, where JavaScript says, okay,
I'm going to run this every 2 seconds, but I'm not going to block anything else from running.
So JavaScript says, I'm keeping track of this timer of every 2 seconds.
I'll get there eventually, but it continues through the rest of the file.
And before we're at that first 2 seconds, it gets to line number five and it prints out that interval
object.
Then it comes back to its original promise to execute the interval every 2 seconds.
And that's why we continue to see the output after our actual initial console.log of the interval object.
That's just some helpful JavaScript knowledge, but it's not important to know all the details about
how this time that object works.
Just know that this is the object that JavaScript is using to keep track of this timer that's running
every 2 seconds.
Right.
Or however long we specify and we have it available in this interval.
Constant, it's the return value of the set interval function.
So as long as you have this interval object, which you must keep a reference to by saying saving it
to something like a variable or constant, then there is a helpful function called clear interval in
JavaScript, and if you pass it an interval object, it knows to shut it down, right?
To stop whatever it's running, stop the execution of the function that we passed it.
Now, if I run this for right now, you're actually going to see that nothing is going to happen.
And if you think about it for a second, you might realize why this makes sense, knowing what we just
learned.
And the reason is JavaScript says, okay, in 2 seconds, I'm going to run this interval consecutively,
consistent consistently until forever.
But then while it's still waiting for the first 2 seconds, we get to line number five and we immediately
clear that interval so there's nothing left to run.
So the program concludes and we have nothing actually printed in our terminal.
We never actually get to the console.log function at all because 2 seconds haven't passed.
Right?
So just to show you this in action, I'm going to combine a couple ideas that we learned in this lesson.
I'm going to use set time out here, which we introduced first, and that is a function that runs something
once after a given amount of time.
So I'm going to pass it a arrow function and I'm going to pass it an argument of 10,000 milliseconds,
which is 10 seconds.
And in the body of this function, I'm going to run my clear interval function.
So what I'm basically saying is in 10000 seconds, once go ahead and clear the interval.
So before we get to 10,000, we're obviously going to have a couple of executions of 2 seconds or that
time span is going to fit in a couple of times within that 10 seconds.
So we're going to run this function a couple of times.
Now, you may think that 10,000 divided by 2000 means five.
And so we might expect to see the console on five times, but it's actually only going to run four.
And that is just due to the different amount of they're sort of running on different starting points,
if you will, it in time.
And it's not exactly going to be perfect.
Division, let me just show you how this is going to work.
The general idea should be apparent, though, so I'm going to start this and we're going to start the
interval and every 2 seconds we're going to set our clear interval logic in 10 seconds so that 10/2
timer is running down, counting down.
And then once we get there, we clear the interval and the program officially ends.
Right.
And the reason why this is important is the way this is going to work in the browser is we're going
to do a very similar approach to what we have here.
We're going to start an interval and we're going to say every 5 seconds, change the view components
data to whatever is the next verb in line, such as design or build or code.
And then we're also going to build the logic to say if this component is ever on mounted, if it ever
is brought down or destroyed, we have to remember to clear that original interval.
We don't want to run it.
We don't have to leave that running around somewhere in the background of our browser as the user navigates
to a different component.
Right?
We especially don't want the user to come back to the same component and then potentially have multiple
timers running in totally different animals that can.
That's where the potential for a lot of errors pops up.
The key takeaway here is whenever you use set interval, you want to also implement the logic to tear
down that interval, to shut it down, to clear it, to tell JavaScript in the browser, stop this consecutive
running execution that I told you to do every number of seconds.
So be wary.
Whenever you use set interval, there should usually be a complimentary clear interval function call
very close by.
All right.
So at that, we reviewed the functions that we need to know, set time out, set interval and clear
interval, and we're going to be utilizing them in the very next lesson.